
# Lecture 1.1
## Video
<iframe width="397" height="223" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/HdV_r6aIcew" title="Lecture 1.1: The Molecules of Life — Representing Molecules" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
## ‎ 
---

## Transcript:
1. HAZEL SIVE: Welcome to lecture 1 of Getting Up
2. to Speed in Biology.
3. This lecture is called "Molecules of Life."
4. And today, we're going to cover ==two big topics.==
5. The ==first topic== are the ==bonds build molecules==,
6. and ==the second== are the ==macromolecules== themselves.
7. So let's take a moment here.
8. Next time, we'll talk a lot about cells.
9. But today, we're just going to make the ==statement==
10. that ==the building blocks of life are cells.==
11. So life is made of cells.
12. We can think about them as ==building blocks.==
13. They're little building blocks.
14. In humans, ==a cell has about a 10-micrometer diameter.==
15. They are filled with molecules--
16. well, they are made of.
17. And I'll tell you about the molecules as we go along.
18. And they are a bag of chemical reactions.
19. So that's our background.
20. That's the framework that we're going to start with today.
21. Let's go to our first big topic of the day--
22. ==bonds build molecules.==
23. And let me give you a little disclaimer
24. about this lecture and the other parts of Getting Up
25. to Speed in Biology.
26. I want you to have heard of something.
27. I want you to be able to go into a good introductory biology
28. course at MIT or elsewhere, and I
29. want you to have heard of what I'm going to say.
30. You're not going to know all of it.
31. You're not going to know it in depth.
32. But you should be somewhat familiar
33. so that you can go and then do well
34. in your introductory biology course.
35. So ==bonds build molecules==, and a bond holds molecules together.
36. So ==a bond holds molecules together==
37. because bonding is due to attraction between atoms.
38. ==Bonding is due to attraction between atoms.==
39. We'll talk about the kinds of bonds in a moment.
40. ==In life==, there are ==certain key elements== that
41. come up over and over again.
42. And ==there are really six of them.==
43. The ==big one is carbon==, then ==oxygen==, ==nitrogen==, ==phosphorou==s,
44. and ==sulfur==.
45. And I guess that's five and not six.
46. So there are some others we can add,
47. but ==those are really the five big ones.==
48. You're going to need ==the concept here of valency.==
49. Valency refers to how many bonds an atom can make.
50. ==So valency equals the number of bonds an atom can make.==
51. It is a really key concept in biology.
52. And then finally, when we think about bonds building molecules,
53. ==we need to be able to somehow represent molecules==
54. ==in an easy-to-deal-with way.==
55. And this is where we are going to start.
56. We're going to start with representing molecules.
57. So let's look at representing molecules.
58. I'm showing you here ==five different schematics
59. ==of the same molecule.==
60. ==The molecule is butanol.==
61. It's called ==1-butanol==, a particular form
62. of butanol which is an alcohol.
63. The [[27#**Chemical Formula**|chemical formula]] is written on the top--
64. ==4 carbons, 9 hydrogens, and an oxygen==
65. ==and another hydrogen,== which is kind of ==written separately==
66. ==because the OH is a unit.==
67. It's a ==hydroxyl group.==
68. And you may remember this from some chemistry
69. which you have taken before.
70. You can write out the structure of butanol
71. as I've shown it there with the carbons in the line,
72. every carbon written out, every hydrogen written out.
73. And that's called the [[27#**Full structure**]|full structure]].
74. ==All the atoms in the bonds are shown.==
75. But that is ==difficult==. It's a ==nuisance==
76. ==to write out every structure of every molecule.==
77. And so there's a ==shorthand== that we use.
78. And this is the [[27#**Line-angle structure**|bond line structure]].
79. shown where you can see that ==instead of the carbons,==
80. there is ==a broken line.==
81. ==There is a zigzag line.==
82. And the ==carbons are at the corners==
83. or at ==the ends of every line.==
84. So if you ==look at the lines==, you can
85. see that there would be ==a carbon right at the end,==
86. and then the next place, the next place, the next place.
87. And that would ==count up to four carbons.==
88. We can show that to cement this by putting a ==blue dot for each==
89. ==of the carbons==.
90. And then ==we can put red dots for each of the hydrogens.==
91. And ==you can figure out from this where==
92. ==the hydrogen atoms lie== because of this ==concept of valency.==
93. ==Carbon has a valency of four.==
94. ==Every carbon atom can make four bonds.==
95. This is the reason that it is a ==pivotal atom in life==--
96. because it ==can make lots of bonds,==
97. and you ==can get long chains of carbons added together.==
98. And so you can see that ==the hydrogens==
99. ==are surrounding the carbons.==
100. And so you've got an explanation there of the bond line
101. structure as you go down this slide.
102. Let's take a pause now, and you can go and practice
103. representing molecules and figuring out
104. that you know how to go from the chemical formula
105. to the full structure to the bond line, bond angle formula.
106. [End of transcript.](https://openlearninglibrary.mit.edu/courses/course-v1:OCW+Pre-7.01+1T2020/courseware/4cdb513af43943ce8af3be3a6cdb356a/ec6719a057e142c6b863c662f065dde7/?child=first#transcript-start-38bbc16927004422bc1557a3c8821c2b)

___
___
##  ‎ 
---

## Reference Summary
### **Chemical Formula**
Each C, H, and O atom is counted. For example: $$\mathrm{C_4H_9OH}$$

### **Full structure**
All atoms and bonds are shown. For example:
$$
	\begin{array}{l}
	\hspace{7.5mm} \ce{H} \hspace{3.4mm} \ce{H} \hspace{3.5mm} \ce{H} \hspace{4mm} \ce{H}\\
	\hspace{8.5mm} | \hspace{5.6mm} | \hspace{6mm} | \hspace{6mm} | \\
	\ce{H-C-C-C-C-O-H} \\
	\hspace{8.5mm} | \hspace{5.6mm} | \hspace{6mm} | \hspace{6mm} | \\
	\hspace{7.5mm} \ce{H} \hspace{3.4mm} \ce{H} \hspace{3.5mm} \ce{H} \hspace{4mm} \ce{H}\\
	\end{array}
$$

### **Line-angle structure**
Below is **butane**. Carbons are at the corners or ends, and hydrogens are not shown. 
```smiles
!{  "themes": { "dark": {
		"O": "white",
		"H": "gray"
}}}!
[OH]CCCC
```
The locations of the Carbons are shown below in $\color{blue}{BLUE}$.
```smiles
!{  "atomVisualization": "allballs",
	"themes": { "dark": {
		"C": "blue",
		"O": "white",
		"H": "red"
}}}!
[OH]CCCC
```
Now, the locations of the Hydrogens are shown below in $\color{red}{RED}$. 
_Because C has a valency of FOUR (meaning that each C makes four bonds), you can figure out location of H atoms._
```smiles
!{  "atomVisualization": "allballs",
	"themes": { "dark": {
		"C": "blue",
		"O": "white",
		"H": "red"
}}}!
[H][O]C([H])([H])C([H])([H])C([H])([H])C([H])([H])([H])
```
##  ‎ 
---

## Exercise 1 (Acetic Acid)
### Acetic Acid: Carbons
Let us examine the "line-angle" drawing of **acetic acid**!
```smiles
!{"compactDrawing":false}!
OC(C)=O
```
Identify and label all the Carbons in the drawing in $\color{blue}{BLUE}$:
```smiles
!{"compactDrawing":false, "atomVisualization": "allballs", "themes": {"dark": {"C":"blue"}}}!
OC(C)=O
```
- (i)
	Remember, for line-angle diagrams of molecules, the "bends and ends" are carbons where other atoms are **not** present. As such, there are two (2) carbons present for acetic acid, one at the unlabeled end on the left side of the molecule and one at the central bend connected to the -OH and double-bonded to the O. Try sketching the full Lewis structure of acetic acid to place the carbons and hydrogens that are not shown in the line-angle diagram.

### Acetic Acid: Hydrogens
Now, identify how many H's are bound to each C:
```smiles
!{"compactDrawing":false, "themes": {"dark": {"C":"blue"}}}!
OC(C([H])([H])([H]))=O
```
- (i)
	Once you have determined the locations of each carbon, count the number of bonds shown to determine how many hydrogens (bonds not shown) are present for each carbon. Remember that carbon forms four bonds. For acetic acid, the central carbon already has four bonds (one to the other carbon, one to oxygen in the "OH" group, and two to the oxygen in a double bond) so it will not form any more and thus has no hydrogen covalently bonded to it. The other carbon on the left side of the molecule only has one bond shown (to the central carbon) and thus forms three (3) more bonds, a bond each to a hydrogen for a total of three (3) hydrogens. Again, try sketching the full Lewis structure of acetic acid to place the carbons and hydrogens that are not shown in the line-angle diagram.

### Acetic Acid: [[27#**Chemical Formula**|Chemical Formula]]
Give the chemical formula of acetic acid. (Enter answers as an integer.)
- How many C's?: 2
- How many H's?: 4
- How many O's?: 2
## ‎ 
___

## Exercise 2 (Serine)
### Serine: Carbons
Let us now examine the "line-angle" drawing of **serine**!
```smiles
!{"compactDrawing":false}!
C(C(C(=O)O)N)O
```
Identify and label all the Carbons in the drawing in $\color{blue}{BLUE}$:
```smiles
!{"compactDrawing":false, "atomVisualization": "allballs", "themes": {"dark": {"C":"blue"}}}!
C(C(C(=O)O)N)O
```
- (i)
	There are three (3) carbons in serine, each located at the "bends" in the line-angle diagram where another atom is **not** present. Try sketching the full Lewis structure of serine to place the carbons and hydrogens that are not shown in the line-angle diagram.
### Serine: Hydrogens
```smiles
!{"compactDrawing":false, "themes": {"dark": {"C":"blue"}}}!
C([H])([H])(C([H])(C(=O)O)N)O
```
- (i)
	There are three (3) carbons in serine, but not all the carbons have hydrogens attached. Remember to count the number of shown bonds. If there are less than four covalent bonds on carbon, the remaining **not shown** bonds are made of up bonds to hydrogen. In the serine diagram shown, the leftmost carbon has two (2) bonds shown, leaving two (2) hydrogens not shown. The center carbon has three (3) bonds shown, leaving one (1) hydrogen not shown. The rightmost carbon, which is part of the carboxyl group, has all four (4) bonds shown and no hydrogens. Try sketching the full Lewis structure of serine to place the carbons and hydrogens that are not shown in the line-angle diagram.
### Serine: [[27#**Chemical Formula**|Chemical Formula]]
Give the chemical formula of serine. (Enter answers as an integer.)
- How many C's?: 3
- How many H's?: 7
- How many N's?: 1
- How many O's?: 3

##  ‎ 
---